## From an engineer's diary - Embrace the crisis

Dear Diary,

Let us think about crises. Perhaps we define it first - the words' origin comes from ancient Greek - κρίσις (krisis)/ κρίνω (krino). κρίνω - in short it means something like to separate/divide/distinguish but includes to judge/contest/dispute as well. Interestingly, the crisis got a very negative coating over time. When we speak today about a crisis, we mean something like a difficult or dangerous point in a situation/time. What is also implied is that this turning point has one or more resolutions, which might end in a happy end or utter disaster.

So why should I care, as a software engineer, about crises? Is that not just some sort of shenanigans I get into here? Well, I think that crises and more importantly crisis handling are part of our work in software engineering, even if we will not acknowledge it. But let us scope the term first. We can chunk crises in 3 layers: Organization or Suborganizations  (like a company or sub-company) we are working in; unit or subunit (like a department or team) and the individual contributors. And to state the obvious - of course, all 3 layers are related to each other - be it directly or indirectly. Important here - if a crisis occurs in one of those layers, they shine into the others, even though their impact might be different. For example, if I experience a crisis as an engineer, the impact on my company will most likely be negligible. If my company is in a crisis, it might heavily impact my life and my psychological safety. Or let's say I am the CTO, and in a crisis, the impact on the Organization is surely different by magnitudes.

Okay…enough definitions, but let me drop a thing before I come to the meat (I am vegetarian, I swear) of this text - Sociotechnical systems (STS). When I am thinking about tech and crises, it is a thing I should mention.<br>
Well first and foremost, you need to realize that a crisis is ongoing, easy right? A surprise for me was that people sometimes are so used to acting in crisis mode that they forget how different it can be. Secondly, a crisis needs analysis. You need to know what you are dealing with. If you are not able to locate the root cause of it and take appropriate actions, the outcome is likely not in our favour. Moreover, a crisis will expose weaknesses, shortcomings, and inefficiencies in your Organization, Unit, or of yourself. This of course sounds scary, but it can work for you. I remember a point where an entire team was at stake. It had to achieve certain goals in a certain time and the team might have survived. However, while some invested in that endeavour, others just pursued their personal goals and agendas. This created friction since each tiny action needed to be discussed and prohibited fast-paced. From the outside, it might have looked like the team was not able to solve their issues or only individuals were skilled enough. That for sure raised the question - why is the rest of the team even needed? Ultimately, the team failed to succeed and it was laid off in the end. What I can learn here, is: if a team does not act as a unit in a time of crisis, it will lead to failure. This small example contains 2 things - a) we have criteria that are measurable (to an extent) and b) we can lay out some characteristics that are worth aiming for to increase team performance.

a) the criteria we care about most here is - how a unit or individual contributes to the overall success of its surroundings. Please, don’t confuse it with a threshold. It is just a measurable criterion that can be monitored, nothing else. It helps to keep track of a situation and enables further analysis.
b) is much more interesting. Given you don’t deal with reluctant people, teams, or organizations (this is a topic for another day), a good crisis will let those characteristics shine. What I am talking about?:
- a shared understanding of work. This includes what needs to be done, what has which priority, and which resources need to be allocated to achieve the work. I think this sounds easier than it is achievable. The problem space needs to be understood equally to each member of the team. It also requires an awareness of the skill sets and capability in the team. While there is no easy answer to how to get there, I think, a key component is listening, understanding, and compromising with your peers, especially in times of great pressure. But you also need to know where to push for it.
  A good tool might here pair/assemble programming or a shared activity like coding katas to create a shared understanding.
- a shared understanding on the way to approach work. No matter what you use Scrum, Kanban, or pair programming; everybody should understand why this method and which purpose it serves. You might want to add or change or remove rituals/ways of doing things. But also be open to try new things - like pair programming. It might need some time to get the hang of it, but once you master it (which might need longer than a sprint or two) to see the benefits. Also save things, especially retrospectives, which act as a corrective.
- everybody in the team is visible/identifies with the team. I cannot overstate how important this is. Each member of the team; be it an intern or team-lead; be it backend, or frontend, or designer; should have their five minutes, their card on the board, etc. The reason is simple: you need to drive work as a team not as single contributors. This prevents situations where you start to work against each other. The goal should be, here, that you want to say: “We do” instead of “I do”. You are branded by your team, so to speak. You commit to being a part of it.
- autonomous regulation. The team makes its own decisions and takes responsibility for that. In other words, it owns their actions. This implies that the team can react and adapt quickly to new situations.
  Even more, this ensures that everybody participates in critical decisions and has the opportunity to raise their opinions/concerns. This prevents scenarios where people go rough and do their own agenda or the opposite where people execute what they are told to.
- a safe space. This is, in my opinion, the most crucial point. You can express that I think in one important word: Trust! While a safe space of course does not generate trust on its own, it facilitates it. And trust is what you need if you want to accelerate. Trust is like the sworn enemy of micromanaging, if you can trust your peers, you can trust their work. However, if trust is lost in/into a team, it is a crisis on its own, which will lead to failure sooner or later. Even though I love failure, this is something you can avoid.

Well, I am mumbling. A crisis will not automatically drive everybody to this, but due to its character of urgency, it creates an environment where each of those points gets much more prominent. Furthermore, it might give degrees of freedom that had been previously unimaginable, like rethinking the current tech stack or introducing a different methodology (I love you TDD) and so on since everything is in question anyway. The flip side is that it might also show limitations that are not achievable in the Organization or the Unit.
In any case, a good crisis has the power to change things - don’t waste it, embrace it!<br>
That’s it for today, write to you soon!
